.. !split

.. _nonlin:alglevel:1D:

Discretization of nonlinear differential equations
==================================================

the section :ref:`nonlin:pdelevel` presents methods for linearizing
time-discrete PDEs directly prior to discretization in space.  We can
alternatively carry out the discretization in space and of the
time-discrete nonlinear PDE problem and get a system of nonlinear
algebraic equations, which can be solved by Picard iteration or
Newton's method as presented in the section :ref:`nonlin:systems:alg`.
This latter approach will now be described in detail.

We shall work with the 1D problem


.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:pde:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:pde
        
        -({\alpha}(u)u')' + au = f(u),\quad x\in (0,L),
        \quad {\alpha}(u(0))u'(0) = C,\ u(L)=0
        {\thinspace .}
        
        

This problem is of the same nature as those arising from implicit
time integration of a nonlinear diffusion PDE as outlined in
the section :ref:`nonlin:pdelevel:Picard` (set :math:`a=1/\Delta t` and let
:math:`f(u)` incorporate the nonlinear source term as well as
known terms with the time-dependent unknown function at the previous
time level).

.. _nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:

Finite difference discretizations
---------------------------------

Discretization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The nonlinearity in
the differential equation :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:pde` poses no more
difficulty than a variable coefficient, as in :math:`({\alpha}(x)u')'`.
We can therefore use a standard approach to discretizing the Laplace
term with a variable coefficient:


.. math::
         [-D_x{\alpha} D_x u +au = f]_i{\thinspace .}

Writing this out for a uniform mesh with points :math:`x_i=i\Delta x`,
:math:`i=0,\ldots,N_x`, leads to


.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:deq0:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:deq0
        
        -\frac{1}{\Delta x^2}
        \left({\alpha}_{i+\frac{1}{2}}(u_{i+1}-u_i) -
        {\alpha}_{i-\frac{1}{2}}(u_{i}-u_{i-1})\right)
        + au_i = f(u_i){\thinspace .}
        
        

This equation is valid at all the mesh points :math:`i=0,1,\ldots,N_x-1`.
At :math:`i=N_x` we have the Dirichlet condition :math:`u_i=0`.
The only difference from the case with :math:`({\alpha}(x)u')'` and :math:`f(x)` is that
now :math:`{\alpha}` and :math:`f` are functions of :math:`u` and not only on :math:`x`:
:math:`({\alpha}(u(x))u')'` and :math:`f(u(x))`.

The quantity :math:`{\alpha}_{i+\frac{1}{2}}`, evaluated between two mesh points,
needs a comment. Since :math:`{\alpha}` depends on :math:`u` and :math:`u` is only known
at the mesh points, we need to express :math:`{\alpha}_{i+\frac{1}{2}}` in
terms of :math:`u_i` and :math:`u_{i+1}`. For this purpose we use an arithmetic
mean, although a harmonic mean is also common in this context if
:math:`{\alpha}` features large jumps.
There are two choices of arithmetic means:


.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:dfc:mean:u:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:dfc:mean:u
        
        {\alpha}_{i+\frac{1}{2}} \approx
        {\alpha}(\frac{1}{2}(u_i + u_{i+1}) =
        [{\alpha}(\overline{u}^x)]^{i+\frac{1}{2}},
        
        
        



.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:dfc:mean:dfc:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:dfc:mean:dfc
          
        {\alpha}_{i+\frac{1}{2}} \approx
        \frac{1}{2}({\alpha}(u_i) + {\alpha}(u_{i+1})) = [\overline{{\alpha}(u)}^x]^{i+\frac{1}{2}}
        
        

Equation :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:deq0` with
the latter approximation then looks like


.. math::
        
        -\frac{1}{2\Delta x^2}
        \left(({\alpha}(u_i)+{\alpha}(u_{i+1}))(u_{i+1}-u_i) -
        ({\alpha}(u_{i-1})+{\alpha}(u_{i}))(u_{i}-u_{i-1})\right)\nonumber
        



.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:deq:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:deq
          
        \qquad\qquad + au_i = f(u_i),
        
        

or written more compactly,


.. math::
         [-D_x\overline{{\alpha}}^x D_x u +au = f]_i{\thinspace .}


At mesh point :math:`i=0` we have the boundary condition :math:`{\alpha}(u)u'=C`,
which is discretized by


.. math::
         [{\alpha}(u)D_{2x}u = C]_0,

meaning


.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:Neumann:x0:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:Neumann:x0
        
        {\alpha}(u_0)\frac{u_{1} - u_{-1}}{2\Delta x} = C{\thinspace .}
        
        

The fictitious value :math:`u_{-1}` can be eliminated with the aid
of :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:deq` for :math:`i=0`.
Formally, :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:deq` should be solved with
respect to :math:`u_{i-1}` and that value (for :math:`i=0`) should be inserted in
:eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:Neumann:x0`, but it is algebraically
much easier to do it the other way around. Alternatively, one can
use a ghost cell :math:`[-\Delta x,0]` and update the :math:`u_{-1}` value
in the ghost cell according to :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:Neumann:x0`
after every Picard or Newton iteration. Such an approach means that
we use a known :math:`u_{-1}` value in :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:deq`
from the previous iteration.

Solution of algebraic equations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The nonlinear algebraic equations :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:deq` are
of the form :math:`A(u)u = b(u)` with


.. math::
        
        A_{i,i} &= \frac{1}{2\Delta x^2}(-{\alpha}(u_{i-1}) + 2{\alpha}(u_{i})
        -{\alpha}(u_{i+1})) + a,\\ 
        A_{i,i-1} &= -\frac{1}{2\Delta x^2}({\alpha}(u_{i-1}) + {\alpha}(u_{i})),\\ 
        A_{i,i+1} &= -\frac{1}{2\Delta x^2}({\alpha}(u_{i}) + {\alpha}(u_{i+1})),\\ 
        b_i &= f(u_i){\thinspace .}
        

The matrix :math:`A(u)` is tridiagonal: :math:`A_{i,j}=0` for :math:`j>1+1` and :math:`j<i-1`.
The obvious Picard iteration scheme is to use previously computed
values of :math:`u_i` in :math:`A(u)` and :math:`b(u)`, as described more in detail in
the section :ref:`nonlin:systems:alg`.

Newton's method requires computation of the Jacobian. Here it means
that we need to differentiate :math:`F(u)=A(u)u - b(u)` with respect to
:math:`u_0,u_1,\ldots,u_{N_x-1}`. Nonlinear equation number :math:`i` has
the structure


.. math::
         F_i = A_{i,i-1}(u_{i-1},u_i)u_{i-1} +
        A_{i,i}(u_{i-1},u_i,u_{i+1})u_i +
        A_{i,i+1}(u_i, u_{i+1})u_{i+1} - b_i(u_i){\thinspace .}

The Jacobian becomes


.. math::
        
        J_{i,i} &= \frac{\partial F_i}{\partial u_i}
        = \frac{\partial A_{i,i-1}}{\partial u_i}u_{i-1}
        + \frac{\partial A_{i,i}}{\partial u_i}u_i
        - \frac{\partial b_i}{\partial u_i}
        + A_{i,i}
        + \frac{\partial A_{i,i+1}}{\partial u_i}u_{i+1}
        - \frac{\partial b_i}{\partial u_{i}}\\ 
        &=
        \frac{1}{2\Delta x^2}(
        -{\alpha}'(u_i)u_{i-1}
        +2{\alpha}'(u_i)u_{i}
        +(-{\alpha}(u_{i-1}) + 2{\alpha}(u_i) - {\alpha}(u_{i+1}))) +\\ 
        &\quad a
        -\frac{1}{2\Delta x^2}{\alpha}'(u_{i})u_{i+1})
        - b'(u_i),\\ 
        J_{i,i-1} &= \frac{\partial F_i}{\partial u_{i-1}}
        = \frac{\partial A_{i,i-1}}{\partial u_{i-1}}u_{i-1}
        + A_{i-1,i}
        + \frac{\partial A_{i,i}}{\partial u_{i-1}}u_i
        - \frac{\partial b_i}{\partial u_{i-1}}\\ 
        &=
        \frac{1}{2\Delta x^2}(
        -{\alpha}'(u_{i-1})u_{i-1} - ({\alpha}(u_{i-1}) + {\alpha}(u_i))
        + {\alpha}'(u_{i-1})u_i),\\ 
        J_{i,i+1} &= \frac{\partial A_{i,i+1}}{\partial u_{i-1}}u_{i+1}
        + A_{i+1,i} +
        \frac{\partial A_{i,i}}{\partial u_{i+1}}u_i
        - \frac{\partial b_i}{\partial u_{i+1}}\\ 
        &=\frac{1}{2\Delta x^2}(
        -{\alpha}'(u_{i+1})u_{i+1} - ({\alpha}(u_{i}) + {\alpha}(u_{i+1}))
        + {\alpha}'(u_{i+1})u_i){\thinspace .}
        {\thinspace .}
        

The explicit expression for nonlinear equation number :math:`i`,
:math:`F_i(u_0,u_1,\ldots)`, arises from moving all terms in
:eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fd:deq` to the left-hand side. Then we have
:math:`J_{i,j}` and :math:`F_i` (modulo the boundary conditions) and can implement
Newton's method.

We have seen, and can see from the present example, that the
linear system in Newton's method contains all the terms present
in the system that arises in the Picard iteration method.
The extra terms in Newton's method can be multiplied by a factor
such that it is easy to program one linear system and set this
factor to 0 or 1 to generate the Picard or Newton system.

.. Remark: Neumann cond at x=L and Dirichlet at x=0 leads to different

.. numbering of unknowns and u at mesh points. Must address this

.. in a remark and treat it properly in diffu.




.. _nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:

Finite element discretizations
------------------------------

For the finite element discretization we first need to derive the
variational problem. Let :math:`V` be an appropriate function space
with basis functions :math:`\left\{ {{\psi}}_i \right\}_{i\in{\mathcal{I}_s}}`. Because of the
Dirichlet condition at :math:`x=L` we require :math:`{\psi}_i(L)=0`, :math:`i\in{\mathcal{I}_s}`.
Using Galerkin's method,
we multiply the differential equation by any :math:`v\in V`, integrate
terms with second-order derivatives by parts, and insert the
Neumann condition at :math:`x=0`. The variational problem is then:
find :math:`u\in V` such that


.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:pde:varform:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:pde:varform
        
        \int_0^L {\alpha}(u)u'v'{\, \mathrm{d}x} + \int_0^L auv{\, \mathrm{d}x} =
        \int_0^L f(u)v{\, \mathrm{d}x} - Cv(0),\quad \forall v\in V{\thinspace .}
        
        

To derive the algebraic equations we also demand the above equations
to hold for :math:`v={\psi}_i`, :math:`i\in{\mathcal{I}_s}`, and we set
:math:`u=\sum_{j\in{\mathcal{I}_s}}c_j{\psi}_j`. The result is


.. math::
        
        \sum_{j\in{\mathcal{I}_s}}\left(
        \int_0^L {\alpha}(\sum_{k\in{\mathcal{I}_s}}c_k{\psi}_k)
        {\psi}_j'{\psi}_i'{\, \mathrm{d}x}\right)c_j =
        \int_0^L f(\sum_{k\in{\mathcal{I}_s}}c_k{\psi}_k){\psi}_i{\, \mathrm{d}x} -
        C{\psi}_i(0),\quad i\in{\mathcal{I}_s}{\thinspace .}
        


Remark
~~~~~~

Fundamental integration problem
Methods that use the Galerkin or weighted residual principle
face a fundamental difficulty in nonlinear
problems: how can we integrate a terms like
:math:`\int_0^L {\alpha}(\sum_{k}c_k{\psi}_k){\psi}_i'{\psi}_j'{\, \mathrm{d}x}`
and :math:`\int_0^L f(\sum_{k}c_k{\psi}_k){\psi}_i{\, \mathrm{d}x}`
when we do not know
the :math:`c_k` coefficients in the argument of the :math:`{\alpha}` function?
We can resort to numerical integration, provided an approximate
:math:`\sum_kc_k{\psi}_k` can be used for the argument :math:`u` in :math:`f` and :math:`{\alpha}`.
If we want to derive the structure of the nonlinear algebraic
equations, we need to apply numerical integration based on the
nodes only and/or the group finite element method.


.. _nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:group:

The group finite element method
-------------------------------

Finite element notation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let us simplify the model problem for a while and set :math:`a=0`, :math:`{\alpha}=1`,
:math:`f(u)=u^2`, and have Dirichlet conditions at both ends such that we
get a very simple nonlinear problem :math:`-u''=u^2`. The variational form
is then


.. math::
         \int_0^L u'v'{\, \mathrm{d}x} = \int_0^L u^2v{\, \mathrm{d}x},\quad\forall v\in V{\thinspace .}

The term with :math:`u'v'` is well known so the only new feature is
the term :math:`\int u^2v{\, \mathrm{d}x}`.

Introduction of finite element basis functions :math:`{\varphi}_i` means setting


.. math::
         {\psi}_i = {\varphi}_{\nu(i)},\quad i\in{\mathcal{I}_s},

where degree of freedom number :math:`\nu(j)` in the mesh corresponds to
unknown number :math:`j`. When the degrees of freedom are just the function
values at nodes, we have that :math:`c_j=u(x_{\nu(j)})=u_{\nu(j)}`, i.e., the value of
:math:`u` at node number :math:`\nu(j)`.
The finite element expansion for :math:`u`
is now


.. math::
         u = \sum_{j\in{I_b}} U_j{\varphi}_j + \sum_{j\in{\mathcal{I}_s}}{\varphi}_{\nu(j)}u_{\nu(j)},

with the :math:`U_j` quantities being prescribed Dirichlet values at some nodes
with numbers in the index :math:`{I_b}`. Instead of the :math:`\nu(j)` indices
in the sum :math:`\sum_{j\in{\mathcal{I}_s}}{\varphi}_{\nu(j)}u_{\nu(j)}`, we just write
:math:`\sum_{j}{\varphi}_ju_j`. This is possible by saying that :math:`j` runs over
a transformed index set:
:math:`\{\nu(0),\nu(1),\ldots,\nu(N)\}`. In the following we drop the
boundary term :math:`\sum_j U_j{\varphi}_j` and write
:math:`u = \sum_j{\varphi}_j u_j`. The replacement of :math:`c_j` by :math:`u_j` as explained
is motivated by simpler interpretation of the nonlinear algebraic
equations as a finite difference scheme.

Integrating nonlinear functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Consider the term :math:`\int u^2v{\, \mathrm{d}x}` in the variational formulation
with :math:`v={\varphi}_i` and :math:`u=\sum_k{\varphi}_ku_k`:


.. math::
         \int_0^L (\sum_ku_k{\varphi}_k)^2{\varphi}_i{\, \mathrm{d}x}{\thinspace .}

Evaluating this integral for P1 elements (see :ref:`nonlin:exer:fu:fem:int`) results in the expression


.. math::
         \frac{h}{12}(u_{i-1}^2 + 2u_i(u_{i-1} + u_{i+1}) + 6u_i^2
        + u_{i+1}^2,

to be compared with the simple value :math:`u_i^2` that would arise in
a finite difference discretization. More complicated :math:`f(u)` functions
give rise to much more lengthy expressions, if it is possible to
carry out the integral symbolically.


.. index:: group finite element method


.. index:: product approximation technique


Finite element approximation of functions of :math:`u`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since we already expand :math:`u` as :math:`\sum_j{\varphi}_ju_j` we may use the
same approximation for nonlinearities. That is, any function can be
expanded as a sum of basis functions times the function values.
In particular,


.. math::
        
        f(u)\approx \sum_{j\in{I_b}} {\varphi}_jf(u_j)
        + \sum_{j} {\psi}_{j}(x)f(u_j),
        

where the first sum contain :math:`f` values at the boundary where :math:`u` has
Dirichlet conditions and the other sum is over the node values :math:`j`
where :math:`u` is unknown. However, for :math:`f` there is no reason two have
two summations as we do not need to distinguish between the nodes where
:math:`u` are known or unknown. Therefore, we can collapse the two
sums into one (over all nodes, :math:`j=0,\ldots,N_n`) and write


.. math::
        
        f(u) \approx \sum_{j=0}^{N_n} {\varphi}_j(x)f(u_j){\thinspace .}
        

This approximation is known as the *group finite element method*
or the *product approximation* technique.

The principal advantage of the group finite element method is for
deriving the *symbolic form* of difference equations in nonlinear problems.
The symbolic form is useful for comparing finite element and finite
difference equations of nonlinear differential equation problems.
Computer programs
will always integrate :math:`\int f(u){\varphi}_i{\, \mathrm{d}x}` numerically by using
an existing approximation of :math:`u` in :math:`f(u)` such that the integrand
can be sampled at any spatial point.

Application
~~~~~~~~~~~

Let use the group finite element method to derive the terms in
the difference equation corresponding to :math:`f(u)` in the differential
equation. We have


.. math::
         \int_0^L f(u){\varphi}_i{\, \mathrm{d}x} \approx
        \int_0^L (\sum_j {\varphi}_jf(u_j)){\varphi}_i{\, \mathrm{d}x}
        = \sum_j \left(\int_0^L {\varphi}_i{\varphi}_j{\, \mathrm{d}x}\right) f(u_j){\thinspace .}

We recognize this expression as the mass matrix :math:`M`, arising from
:math:`\int{\varphi}_i{\varphi}_j{\, \mathrm{d}x}`, times the
vector :math:`f=(f(u_0),f(u_1),\ldots,)`: :math:`Mf`. The associated terms
in the difference equations are


.. math::
         \frac{h}{6}(f(u_{i-1}) + 4f(u_i) + f(u_{i+1})){\thinspace .}

Occasionally, we want to interpret this expression in terms of finite
differences and then a rewrite of this expression is convenient:


.. math::
         \frac{h}{6}(f(u_{i-1}) + 4f(u_i) + f(u_{i+1}))
        = h[f(u) - \frac{h^2}{6}D_xD_x f(u)]_i{\thinspace .}

We may lump the mass matrix through integration with the Trapezoidal
rule. In that case the :math:`f(u)` term in the differential equation
gives rise to a single term :math:`hf(u_i)`, just as in the finite difference
method.


.. _nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:f:

Numerical integration of nonlinear terms
----------------------------------------

Let us reconsider a term :math:`\int f(u)v{\, \mathrm{d}x}` as treated in the previous
section, but now we want to integrate this term numerically.
Such an approach can lead to easy-to-interpret formulas if we apply
a numerical integration rule that samples the integrand at the node
points.

The term in question takes the form


.. math::
         \int_0^L f(\sum_k u_k{\varphi}_k){\varphi}_i{\, \mathrm{d}x}{\thinspace .}

Evaluation of the integrand at a node :math:`x_{\ell}` leads to a
collapse of the sum :math:`\sum_k u_k{\varphi}_k` to one term because


.. math::
         \sum_k u_k{\varphi}_k(x_{\ell}) = u_\ell{\thinspace .}



.. math::
         f(\sum_k u_k\underbrace{{\varphi}_k(x_{\ell})}_{\delta_{k\ell}})
        \underbrace{{\varphi}_i(x_{\ell})}_{\delta_{i\ell}}
        = f(u_\ell)\delta_{i\ell},

where we have used the Kronecker delta :math:`\delta_{ij}=0` if :math:`i\neq j` and
:math:`\delta_{ij}=1` if :math:`i=j`.

Considering the Trapezoidal rule for integration, we have



.. math::
        
        \int_0^L f(\sum_k u_k{\varphi}_k)(x){\varphi}_i(x){\, \mathrm{d}x}
        \approx h\sum_{\ell=0}^{N_n} f(u_\ell)\delta_{i\ell} - \mathcal{C}\\ 
        = hf(u_i){\thinspace .}
        

The term :math:`\mathcal{C}` contains the evaluations of the integrand
at the ends with weight :math:`\frac{1}{2}`, needed to make a true Trapezoidal rule.
The answer :math:`hf(u_i)` must therefore be multiplied by :math:`\frac{1}{2}` if
:math:`i=0` or :math:`i=N_n`.
(:math:`\mathcal{C} = \frac{h}{2}f(u_0){\varphi}_i(0) + \frac{h}{2}f(u_{N_n}){\varphi}_i(L)`.)

One can easily use the Trapezoidal rule on the reference cell and
assemble the contributions. It is a bit more work in this context,
but working on the reference cell is safer as that approach is
guaranteed to handle discontinuous derivatives of finite element
functions correctly.

The conclusion is that it suffices to use the Trapezoidal rule if
one wants to derive the difference equations in the finite element
method and make them similar to those arising in the finite difference
method. The Trapezoidal rule has sufficient accuracy for P1 elements, but
for P2 elements one should turn to Simpson's rule.

.. _nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Laplace:

Finite element discretization of a variable coefficient Laplace term
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Turning back to the model problem :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:pde`, it
remains to calculate the contribution of the :math:`({\alpha} u')'`
and boundary terms
to the difference equations. The integral in the variational form
corresponding to :math:`({\alpha} u')'` is


.. math::
         \int_0^L {\alpha}(\sum_k c_k{\psi}_k){\psi}_i'{\psi}_j'{\, \mathrm{d}x}{\thinspace .}

Numerical integration utilizing a value of :math:`\sum_k c_k{\psi}_k` from
a previous iteration must in general be used to compute the integral.
Now our aim is to integrate symbolically, as much as we can, to obtain
some insight into how the finite element method approximates
this term.

To be able to derive symbolic expressions, we either turn to
the group finite element method or numerical integration in the
node points. Finite element basis functions :math:`{\varphi}_i` are used,
we set :math:`{\alpha}(u)\approx \sum_k\alpha(u_k){\varphi}_k`, and then
we write



.. math::
        
        \int_0^L {\alpha}(\sum_k c_k{\varphi}_k){\varphi}_i'{\varphi}_j'{\, \mathrm{d}x}
        \approx
        \sum_k (\underbrace{\int_0^L {\varphi}_k{\varphi}_i'{\varphi}_j'{\, \mathrm{d}x}}_{L_{i,j,k}})
        {\alpha}(u_k) = \sum_k L_{i,j,k}{\alpha}(u_k){\thinspace .}
        

Further calculations are now easiest to carry out in the reference
cell. With P1 elements we can compute
:math:`L_{i,j,k}` for the two :math:`k` values that are relevant on the reference
cell. Turning to local indices, one gets


.. math::
        
        L_{r,s,t}^{(e)} =
        \frac{1}{2h}\left(\begin{array}{rr}
        1 & -1\\ 
        -1 & 1
        \end{array}\right),\quad t=0, 1,
        

where :math:`r,s,t=0,1` are indices over local degrees of
freedom in the reference cell
(:math:`i=q(e,r)`, :math:`j=q(e,s)`, and :math:`k=q(e,t)`). The
sum :math:`\sum_k L_{i,j,k}{\alpha}(u_k)` at the cell level becomes
:math:`\sum_{t=0}^1 L_{r,s,t}^{(e)}{\alpha}(\tilde u_t)`, where :math:`\tilde u_t`
is :math:`u(x_{q(e,t)})`, i.e., the value of :math:`u` at local node number :math:`t` in
cell number :math:`e`. The element matrix becomes


.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Laplace:Ae:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Laplace:Ae
        
        \frac{1}{2} ({\alpha}(\tilde u_0) + {\alpha}(\tilde u_1))
        \frac{1}{h}\left(\begin{array}{rr}
        1 & -1\\ 
        -1 & 1
        \end{array}\right){\thinspace .}
        
        

As usual, we employ
a left-to-right numbering of cells and nodes.
Row number :math:`i` in the global matrix gets contributions from
the first row of the element matrix in cell :math:`i-1` and the last
row of the element matrix in cell :math:`i`.
In cell number :math:`i-1` the sum
:math:`{\alpha}(\tilde u_0) + {\alpha}(\tilde u_1)` corresponds to
:math:`{\alpha}(u_{i-1}) + {\alpha}(u_i)`. The same becomes
:math:`{\alpha}(u_{i}) + {\alpha}(u_{i+1})` in cell number :math:`i`.
We can with this insight assemble the contributions to row number :math:`i`
in the global matrix:


.. math::
         \frac{1}{2h}(-({\alpha}(u_{i-1}) + {\alpha}(u_i)),\quad
        {\alpha}(u_{i-1}) + 2{\alpha}(u_i) + {\alpha}(u_{i+1}),\quad
        {\alpha}(u_{i}) + {\alpha}(u_{i+1})){\thinspace .}
        

Multiplying by the vector of unknowns :math:`u_i` results in


.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Laplace:diffeq:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Laplace:diffeq
        
        -\frac{1}{h}(\frac{1}{2}({\alpha}(u_i) + {\alpha}(u_{i+1}))(u_{i+1}-u_i)
        -  \frac{1}{2}({\alpha}(u_{i-1}) + {\alpha}(u_{i}))(u_{i}-u_{i-1})),
        
        

which is nothing but the standard finite difference discretization
of :math:`-({\alpha}(u)u')'` with an arithmetic mean of :math:`{\alpha}(u)` (and a
factor :math:`h` because of the integration in the finite element method).

Instead of using the group finite element method and exact integration
we can turn to the Trapezoidal rule for computing
:math:`\int_0^L {\alpha}(\sum_k u_k{\varphi}_k){\varphi}_i'{\varphi}_j'{\, \mathrm{d}x}`, again at
the cell level since that is most convenient:


.. math::
        
        \int_{-1}^1 {\alpha}(\sum_{t=0}^1
        \tilde u_t{\tilde{\varphi}}_t)\frac{2}{h}\frac{d{\tilde{\varphi}}_r}{dX}
        \frac{2}{h}\frac{d{\tilde{\varphi}}_s}{dX}\frac{h}{2}dX
        = \frac{1}{2h}(-1)^r(-1)^s \int_{-1}^1 {\alpha}(\sum_{t=0}^1 u_t{\tilde{\varphi}}_t(X))dX
        \nonumber
        



.. math::
          
         \approx \frac{1}{2h}(-1)^r(-1)^s(
        \sum_{t=0}^1{\tilde{\varphi}}_t(-1)\tilde u_t + \sum_{t=0}^1{\tilde{\varphi}}_t(1)\tilde u_t)
        \nonumber
        



.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Laplace:Ae:Trapez:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Laplace:Ae:Trapez
          
        = \frac{1}{2h}(-1)^r(-1)^s({\alpha}(\tilde u_0) + {\alpha}(\tilde u_1)){\thinspace .}
        
        

The element matrix in :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Laplace:Ae:Trapez`
is identical to the one in
:eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Laplace:Ae`, showing that the
group finite element method and Trapezoidal integration are
equivalent with a standard finite discretization of a
nonlinear Laplace term :math:`({\alpha}(u)u')'` using an arithmetic mean for
:math:`{\alpha}`: :math:`[D_x\overline{x}D_xu]_i`.

We might comment on integration in the physical coordinate system too.
The common Trapezoidal rule in the section :ref:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:f`
cannot be used to integrate derivatives like :math:`{\varphi}_i'`, because
the formula is derived under the assumption of a continuous integrand.
One must instead use the more basic version of the Trapezoidal rule
where all the trapezoids are summed up. This is straightforward, but
I think it is even more straightforward to apply the Trapezoidal
rule on the reference cell and assemble the contributions.

The term :math:`\int auv{\, \mathrm{d}x}` in the variational form is linear and gives
these terms in the algebraic equations:


.. math::
         \frac{ah}{6}(u_{i-1} + 4u_i + u_{i+1})
        = ah[u - \frac{h^2}{6}D_xD_x u]_i{\thinspace .}

The final term in the variational form is the Neumann condition
at the boundary: :math:`Cv(0)=C{\varphi}_i(0)`. With a left-to-right numbering
only :math:`i=0` will give a contribution :math:`Cv(0)=C\delta_{i0}` (since
:math:`{\varphi}_i(0)\neq 0` only for :math:`i=0`).


.. admonition:: Summary

   For the equation
   
   
   .. math::
            -({\alpha}(u)u')' +au = f(u),
   
   P1 finite elements results in difference equations where
   
    * the term :math:`-({\alpha}(u)u')'` becomes :math:`-h[D_x\overline{{\alpha}(u)}^xD_x u]_i`
      if the group finite element method or Trapezoidal integration is applied,
   
    * :math:`f(u)` becomes :math:`hf(u_i)` with Trapezoidal integration or the
      "mass matrix" representation :math:`h[f(u) - \frac{h}{6}D_xD_x f(u)]_i`
      if computed by a group finite element method,
   
    * :math:`au` leads to the "mass matrix" form :math:`ah[u - \frac{h}{6}D_xD_x u]_i`.





As we now have explicit expressions for
the nonlinear difference equations also in the finite
element method, a Picard or Newton method can be defined as shown for
the finite difference method.
Nevertheless, the general situation is that we have not assembled
finite difference-style equations by hand and the linear system
in the Picard or Newton method must therefore be defined
directly through the variational form, as shown next.

.. _nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Picard:

Picard iteration defined from the variational form
--------------------------------------------------

We address again the problem :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:pde` with
the corresponding
variational form :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:pde:varform`.
Our aim is to define a Picard iteration based on this variational
form without any attempt to compute integrals symbolically as in
the previous three sections.
The idea  in Picard iteration is to use a previously computed :math:`u` value in
the nonlinear functions :math:`{\alpha}(u)` and :math:`f(u)`. Let :math:`u_{-}` be
the available approximation to :math:`u` from the previous iteration.
The linearized variational form for Picard iteration is then


.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:pde:varform:Picard:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:pde:varform:Picard
        
        \int_0^L ({\alpha}(u_{-})u'v' + auv){\, \mathrm{d}x} = \int_0^L f(u_{-})v{\, \mathrm{d}x} -
        Cv(0),\quad \forall v\in V{\thinspace .}
        
        

This is a linear problem :math:`a(u,v)=L(v)` with bilinear and linear forms


.. math::
         a(u,v) = \int_0^L ({\alpha}(u_{-})u'v' + auv){\, \mathrm{d}x},\quad
        L(v) = \int_0^L f(u_{-})v{\, \mathrm{d}x} - Cv(0){\thinspace .}

The associated linear system is computed the standard way.
Technically, we are back to solving :math:`-({\alpha}(x)u')' + au=f(x)`.

.. _nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:

Newton's method defined from the variational form
-------------------------------------------------

Application of Newton's method to the nonlinear variational
form :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:pde:varform` arising from
the problem :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:pde` requires identification
of the nonlinear algebraic equations :math:`F_i(c_0,\ldots,c_N)=0`, :math:`i\in{\mathcal{I}_s}`,
and the Jacobian :math:`J_{i,j}=\partial F_i/\partial c_j` for
:math:`i,j\in{\mathcal{I}_s}`.

The equations :math:`F_i=0` follows from the variational form


.. math::
        
        \int_0^L ({\alpha}(u)u'v' + auv){\, \mathrm{d}x} =
        \int_0^L f(u)v{\, \mathrm{d}x} - Cv(0),\quad \forall v\in V,
        

by choosing :math:`v={\psi}_i`, :math:`i\in{\mathcal{I}_s}`, and setting
:math:`u=\sum_{j\in{\mathcal{I}_s}}c_j{\psi}_j`, maybe with a boundary function
to incorporate Dirichlet conditions.

.. provided we sum over all degrees

.. of freedom and incorporate Dirichlet boundary condition in the

.. final linear systems. Alternatively, we can eliminate the

.. Dirichlet conditions from the algebraic systems and

.. use a boundary function in combination with a sum over

.. the truly unknown degrees of freedom of :math:`u` (:math:`\sum_jc_j{\varphi}_{\nu(j)}`).

.. We choose the former approach here since the indices look nicer in

.. the coming derivations.


With :math:`v={\psi}_i` we have


.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Fi:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Fi
        
        F_i =
        \int_0^L ({\alpha}(u)u'{\psi}_i' + au{\psi}_i -
        f(u){\psi}_i){\, \mathrm{d}x} + C{\psi}_i(0)=0,\quad i\in{\mathcal{I}_s}{\thinspace .}
        
        

In the differentiations leading to the Jacobian we will frequently use
the results


.. math::
         \frac{\partial u}{\partial c_j} = \frac{\partial}{\partial c_j}
        \sum_kc_k{\psi}_k = {\psi}_j,\quad
        \frac{\partial u'}{\partial c_j} = \frac{\partial}{\partial c_j}
        \sum_kc_k{\psi}_k' = {\psi}_j'{\thinspace .}

The derivation of the Jacobian goes as


.. math::
        
        J_{i,j} = \frac{\partial F_i}{\partial c_j}
         = \int_0^L \frac{\partial}{\partial c_j}
        ({\alpha}(u)u'{\psi}_i' + au{\psi}_i -
        f(u){\psi}_i){\, \mathrm{d}x}\nonumber
        



.. math::
          
        =
        \int_0^L
        (({\alpha}'(u)\frac{\partial u}{\partial c_j}u' +
        {\alpha}(u)\frac{\partial u'}{\partial c_j}){\psi}_i'
        + a\frac{\partial u}{\partial c_j}{\psi}_i -
        f'(u)\frac{\partial u}{\partial c_j}{\psi}_i){\, \mathrm{d}x}\nonumber
        



.. math::
          
        =
        \int_0^L
        (({\alpha}'(u){\psi}_ju' +
        {\alpha}(u){\psi}_j'{\psi}_i'
        + a{\psi}_j{\psi}_i -
        f'(u){\psi}_j{\psi}_i){\, \mathrm{d}x}\nonumber
        



.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Jij:

.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Jij:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Jij
          
        =
        \int_0^L
        ({\alpha}'(u)u'{\psi}_i'{\psi}_j +
        {\alpha}(u){\psi}_i'{\psi}_j'
        + (a - f(u)){\psi}_i{\psi}_j){\, \mathrm{d}x}
        
        


When calculating the right-hand side vector :math:`F_i` and the coefficient
matrix :math:`J_{i,j}` in the linear system to be solved in each Newton
iteration, one must use
a previously computed :math:`u`, denoted by :math:`u_{-}`, for
the :math:`u` in :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Fi` and
:eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Jij`.
With this notation we have


.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Fi2:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Fi2
        
        F_i =
        \int_0^L\left(
        {\alpha}(u_{-})u_{-}'{\psi}_i' +
        (a-f(u_{-})){\psi}_i\right){\, \mathrm{d}x} -
        C{\psi}_i(0),\quad i\in{\mathcal{I}_s},
        
        



.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Jij:

.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Jij:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Jij
          
        J_{i,j} =
        \int_0^L
        ({\alpha}'(u_{-})u_{-}'{\psi}_i'{\psi}_j +
        {\alpha}(u_{-}){\psi}_i'{\psi}_j'
        + (a - f(u_{-})){\psi}_i{\psi}_j){\, \mathrm{d}x},
        \quad i,j\in{\mathcal{I}_s}{\thinspace .}
        
        

These expressions can be used for any basis :math:`\left\{ {{\psi}}_i \right\}_{i\in{\mathcal{I}_s}}`.
Choosing finite element functions for :math:`{\psi}_i`, one will
normally want to compute the integral contribution cell by cell,
working in a reference cell. To this end, we restrict the
integration to one cell and transform the cell to :math:`[-1,1]`.
The formulas :eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Fi2` and
:eq:`nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Jij` then change to


.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Fi2:e:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Fi2:e
        
        \tilde F_r^{(e)} =
        \int_{-1}^1\left(
        {\alpha}(\tilde u_{-})\tilde u_{-}'{\tilde{\varphi}}_r' +
        (a-f(\tilde u_{-})){\tilde{\varphi}}_r\right)\det J{\, \mathrm{d}X} -
        C{\tilde{\varphi}}_r(0),
        
        



.. _Eq:nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Jij:e:

.. math::
   :label: nonlin:alglevel:1D:fe:Newton:Jij:e
          
        \tilde J_{r,s}^{(e)} =
        \int_{-1}^1
        ({\alpha}'(\tilde u_{-})\tilde u_{-}'{\tilde{\varphi}}_r'{\tilde{\varphi}}_s +
        {\alpha}(\tilde u_{-}){\tilde{\varphi}}_r'{\tilde{\varphi}}_s'
        + (a - f(\tilde u_{-})){\tilde{\varphi}}_r{\tilde{\varphi}}_s)\det J{\, \mathrm{d}X},
        
        

with :math:`r,s\in{I_d}` runs over the local degrees of freedom.
In the above formulas,
:math:`\tilde u_{-}(X)=\sum_r \tilde c_{-r}{\tilde{\varphi}}_r(X)` is the
finite element expansion of :math:`u_{-}` over the current cell.

Many finite element programs require the user to provide :math:`F_i` and
:math:`J_{i,j}`. Some programs, like `FEniCS <http://fenicsproject.org>`_,
are capable of automatically deriving :math:`J_{i,j}` if :math:`F_i`
is specified.

Dirichlet conditions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Incorporation of the Dirichlet values by assembling contributions from
all degrees of freedom and then modifying the linear system can be
obviously be applied to Picard iteration as that method involves
a standard linear system. In the Newton system, however, the unknown
is a correction :math:`\delta u` to the solution. Dirichlet conditions
are implemented by inserting them in the initial guess :math:`u_{-}`
for the Newton iteration and implementing :math:`\delta u_i =0` for
all known degrees of freedom. The manipulation of the linear system
follows exactly the algorithm in the linear problems, the only
difference being that the known values are zero.

